# Solar System II: Origins

In the previous packet, we studied the structure of the solar system. Our findings are summarized neatly in the following diagram:  
Notice that the scale is logarithmic. This means that instead of intervals on the (horizontal axis) increasing linearly, they are increasing exponentially: 1=100, 10=101, 100=102, 

In this packet, we will begin to explore the standard paradigm for the formation of the solar system called the **nebular hypothesis**. This hypothesis was originally advocated in 1755 by [Immanuel Kant](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Immanuel_Kant) and developed scientifically by [Pierre Simon de Laplace](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pierre-Simon_Laplace) in 1796\. In the modern version of this hypothesis, the solar system formed from a “small” part of an enormous cloud of gas and dust that collapsed due to the gravitational attraction between the particles in the cloud. Let’s step through the ingredients and the physics one concept at a time.

# Interstellar Matter, Nebulae, and Molecular Clouds

The space between stars is not entirely empty. For one, stars can have their own versions of solar systems, but all those are relatively modest in extent ( \~ 10-100 AU) compared to the distances between such systems ( \~ 10 lightyears).  

1. Recall that 1 AU  500 ls (light-seconds).   
   1. Convert this to km using the speed of light c=3.0108 m/s.  
   2. The closest star to the Sun (Proxima Centauri) is 4.25 ly away. Use the diagram above to calculate how many Oort cloud-sized systems fit between us and Proxima Centauri. 

We call the stuff between the star systems the **interstellar medium (ISM)**. The interstellar medium consists of radiation (a.k.a. light) and interstellar matter. Interstellar matter, in turn, is mostly gas and dust. The gas can be **ionized**, **atomic**, or **molecular**. Far and away the most significant components are atomic hydrogen (neutral or ionized), helium (neutral or ionized), molecular hydrogen H2. In addition to this, there are much smaller amounts of carbon, oxygen, and nitrogen. A region of concentration of ISM is called a **nebula**. Some nebulae like [Barnard 68](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Barnard_68) at right are so dense that they block all the light coming from the stars behind them. Such **dark nebulae** look like holes in the sky. Others are bright because they are illuminated by nearby stars like the [Trifid Nebula](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trifid_Nebula) below.

Of interest to us will be large nebulae called **molecular clouds**. Such clouds have densities of 100 – 1,000,000 molecules per cubic centimeter and temperatures of 10 – 20 Kelvin. The mass of a molecular cloud is 1% dust with the other 99% being almost entirely hydrogen (91%) and helium (9%).[^1]

An enormous molecular cloud that has a mass in excess of 10,000 M is called a **giant molecular cloud** or **GMC**. They are 15 – 600 lightyears across with masses of 104 \- 107 M.   
The size of the GMC and its mass are related by the **mass density \=M43R3**. When the cloud is sufficiently dispersed, it is a reasonable approximation to take this density to be constant. 

2. 	Assume a GMC has a roughly constant density, and give an estimate for the range of mass densities of a GMC in g/cm3.

The mass of the GMC comes almost entirely from **protons** and **neutrons**. The neutron mass is only a tiny bit smaller than the proton mass, so for the purpose of accounting for mass, we will treat them as the same and refer only to the mass mp1.710-27 kg of the proton. In fact, protons and neutrons are so similar that we sometimes lump them together and call them nucleons: A **nucleon** is either a proton or a neutron.

3. Look up the mass of a proton, a neutron, and an electron using [this website](https://physics.nist.gov/cuu/Constants/). Calculate the difference between the mass of a neutron and a proton and compare it to the mass of an electron. By how many orders of magnitude is the electron mass smaller than the nucleon mass?

4. Give a range of estimates for the number of nucleons in a GMC. 

# The Solar Nebular Disk Model

In this section, we will explore the possibility that the solar system formed from the collapse of a molecular cloud. For definiteness, consider a molecular cloud of radius Rc80 ly and mass Mc106 M. 

5. Using dimensional analysis, estimate the gravitational potential energy in a cloud of this size. 

Gravity is an attractive force, so if we start off with a GMC in which all particles are at rest, all the particles will be attracted to their common center of mass and the cloud will contract. If, on the other hand, the particles all have random velocities with large average speeds, the particles can escape each other’s gravitational attraction and the cloud will disperse.

### The Virial Theorem

In problem 5b of the packet Astrodynamics II, you showed that for the ISS in orbit around the Earth, the kinetic energy Kand potential energy U satisfied the relation K=-U/2.

This is an example of a general rule called the **virial theorem**. This theorem is “powerful” in the sense that it holds under very general conditions and for very complicated systems. Surprisingly, it is not hard to state and–if you know calculus–simple to prove. Consider a system consisting of a large number of particles all interacting through a potential U. Note that U can be a very complicated function of all the particle positions. Luckily, we will not need to know or manipulate its explicit form. To solve for the dynamics of this N-body system means that we would need to find the positions and momenta of each particle at any time. We have discussed how this is already impossible for N3. But suppose we don’t want to know exactly where each particle is and what it is doing at any particular time. Suppose instead, we only want to know some gross features of the system averaged over time. 

The ISS example from problem 5b is a simple case of this general situation: Here there is only one particle (N=1, the ISS itself) and we are not asking where it is as a function of time, but only its kinetic energy K. Since the orbit is circular this kinetic energy is constant and so the time average of it is equal to this constant value and we find that the virial theorem holds somewhat trivially. 

For a less trivial example, suppose the orbit of the ISS is on an orbit that is not circular. This means the orbit must be elliptical, and we know from Kepler’s second law that the speed is not constant. Because of this, the kinetic and potential energies are not constant, so we cannot conclude that K=-U/2.

6. Show that if K=-U/2 then the total mechanical energy E=U/2. For an isolated system (like a secondary on an elliptical orbit around a primary), E is a constant of the motion. Argue that this implies that K cannot be equal to \-U/2 at every point throughout the orbit. 

Now we can see the use of the virial theorem: Although we cannot conclude that K=-U/2, the virial theorem says that this relation does hold if you average over the period of an orbit. Let us denote this average by ⟨⟩: The average kinetic energy over a period is ⟨K⟩ and the average potential energy is ⟨U⟩. Then the **virial theorem** states that:

For a *stable* system of any number of particles interacting through a potential U the *time-averaged* kinetic energy and potential energy satisfy

	2⟨K⟩+⟨U⟩=0	(1)

### (In)Stability of a Giant Molecular Cloud

Let us apply this to our GMC. In problem 5, you estimated the gravitational potential energy of the cloud, so we conclude that this cloud will be stable if the average kinetic energy of the molecules in the cloud is half of this number. In chemistry, we (will) learn that the average kinetic energy of a (monatomic, ideal) gas is related to the temperature of the gas by the formula 

	⟨K⟩=32NkBT	(2)

where kB is called **Boltzmann’s constant** and T is the temperature and N is the number of particles. The SI unit of temperature is degrees Kelvin (denoted K) and in SI units, Boltzmann’s constant has the value kB=1.410-23 JK. Boltzmann’s constant is a universal constant in the same sense as Newton’s constant GN and the speed of light in vacuum c. This constant allows us to convert anything with the dimensions of temperature to something with the dimensions of energy. Since this is always possible, it means that *temperature is just another form of energy*. 

7. If you have already taken chemistry, write a few paragraphs explaining the relation between the Boltzmann constant kB, the ideal gas constant R, Avogadro’s number NA , and the mass of the proton mp. If you have not yet taken chemistry, look up the definitions of any of these constants you don’t know. Carefully write down their values and an explanation of what each constant means.[^2]

The mass of a molecular cloud is accounted for almost entirely by the nucleons making up the atoms and molecules in the cloud. 

8. If the mass of the Sun is entirely due to nucleons, how many nucleons are there in the Sun? Use this to calculate the number N of nucleons in the Giant Molecular Cloud. 

9. Use the virial theorem to find the temperature at which your GMC will not disperse and will also be stable against gravitational collapse. Redo your calculations to show that this critical temperature Tc is 

	Tc GM2NckBR=1kBGmpMR	(3)

Let us pause to contemplate this result: If we recombine kBT we have an energy that is due to temperature; let’s call this “thermal energy”. If the thermal energy is below kBTc=GmpMR gravity wins, and the cloud collapses under its own weight. If the thermal energy exceeds this value GmpMR, there is not enough gravitational potential energy to keep the cloud from dispersing. Looking closely at this value, we notice that it is the gravitational potential energy between a single proton and the whole rest of the cloud when that proton is separated from the center of mass of the cloud by the radius of the cloud, that is, at the edge of the cloud. In other words, this is the gravitational potential energy you gain when you bring a proton from very far away to the edge of the cloud, that is, when you add another proton to the cloud. If the kinetic energy of this particle is higher than that, it will escape back from the cloud. If not, it will fall into the cloud. 

10. Assuming the mass density  of the GMC is constant, show that you can rewrite equation (3) in terms of the mass as 

	MkBTGmp321	(4)

This critical mass is called the **Jeans mass**. If the mass of a molecular cloud is larger than this mass, the cloud is unstable and will collapse under its own gravitational pull. Note that MT3.

11. Calculate the Jeans mass for   
    1. a diffuse hydrogen cloud with temperature T=50 K and density \=8 10-22 g/cm3.   
    2. the dense core of a GMC with temperature T=150 K and density \=2 10-16 g/cm3.   
    3. Verify that a dense core of \~ 100 M with the density in part b has a radius of \~ 2 ly. 

Did you remember to convert your units?

12. The temperatures and densities quoted in problem 11a and 11b are typical of diffuse hydrogen clouds and the cores of GMCs. The masses of the former are typically 1-100 M and those of the latter are typically 10-1000 M.   
    1. Estimate the sizes of the diffuse cloud and the dense core.   
    2. Use this information to comment on the (in)stabilty of typical clouds of these types. 		

In the previous problem, we have seen that a GMC will typically be unstable to gravitational collapse. We will now focus our attention on the dynamics of this collapse. 

Recall that our cloud starts out enormous with a radius of 80 lightyears. The solar system itself is only 40 AU in radius, and since 1 AU corresponds to 500 light-seconds, the solar system is only 5.6 light-hours across, or 130,000 times smaller than the GMC. Thus the solar system is basically 0 size compared to the original cloud. If we want to know how long it takes this cloud to collapse, we may therefore say that it is the time it takes to contract from 80 ly to 0 ly. 

Let us also recall that throughout much of this collapse, the cloud has a very low density. Because of this, molecules in the cloud do not collide throughout much of the contraction. Instead, they free-fall in the gravitational field created by all the other molecules. 

Lots of calculus and goes into an honest derivation of this **free-fall time**. As usual, however, we will just guess it from dimensional analysis. 

13. Use dimensional analysis to derive a formula for the free-fall time tff in terms of the mass M and radius R of the cloud. Remember that this collapse proceeds by gravity, so you probably also need Newton’s constant GN. Use your formula to show that the free-fall time for our cloud is on the order of 10,000 years.

The conclusion from our analysis seems to be that starting from a GMC and waiting a few millennia, we will end up with a collapsed object with a million solar masses. By what we already know of the Schwarzschild radius, this suggests we end up with an enormous black hole. Although many of our calculations were good approximations, what actually happens is somewhat different. To see why, let’s take a closer look at our result from problem 10\. 

Going back to your formula for the free-fall time, you should notice that instead of depending on the mass M and radius R of the cloud separately, it only depends on the mass density MR3: tff1GN. This implies that as long as the density  is the same throughout the cloud, the result is independent of the size R of the cloud. If the cloud is homogeneous (as we assumed when we took constant density), this suggests that the collapse should be happening evenly everywhere throughout the cloud. But if vastly separated parts of the cloud are all contracting in the same way, that suggests that the cloud will fragment. 

Suppose then that the cloud undergoes this **fragmentation** into smaller clouds that continue to contract. Then instead of an outcome with one super-massive dense object at the center of mass, we might expect a bunch of dense and less massive objects all clustered around a common center of mass. If stars and star systems are to form from this model, the prediction seems to be that these will form in clusters with many star systems coming from one enormous cloud. 

Redoing the work we did here more carefully requires simulations on computers. These simulations show that this cloud fragmentation does indeed happen and that the fragments continue to collapse to proto-stellar clouds of their own. [Starforge](https://starforge.space/) has a page with links to high-quality simulations of this process. 

14. Watch this [video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8nCW7419FyU) of GMC collapse and fragmentation. Write a paragraph about what you see and any questions you have. 

[^1]:  These gasses are primordial in nature. In AA: Universe, we will discuss how they are made in a process called [Big Bang Nucleosynthesis](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Big_Bang_nucleosynthesis) and we will see why the relative abundances are numbers quoted here. 

[^2]:  Warning: The ideal gas constant is called R but so is the radius of various things. We will not need the ideal gas constant in the rest of the packet, so henceforth R will refer to radius.