# [ISM](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Interstellar_medium) and [Star Formation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Star_formation)

The birth of a star proceeds in the seven stages summarized in table 1\. In the first three stages, an interstellar cloud of atoms, dust and/or molecules contracts and fragments with a fragment further contracting into the initial stage of a protostar. 

| Stage | time (yr) | Tcore (K) | Tsurface (K) | core gcm3  | diameter  (km) | comparable object | object |
| :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: |
| 1 | 106 | 10 | 10 | 1.7 10-21 | 1014 | 3 pcs | interstellar cloud |
| 2 | 104 | 100 | 10 | 1.7 10-18 | 1012 | — | cloud fragment |
| 3 | 105 | 10,000 | 100 | 1.7 10-12 | 1010\~100 AU | solar system | cloud frag/ protostar |
| 4 | 106 | 1,000,000 | 3000 | 1.7 10-6 | 108100D | earth  orbit | protostar |
| 5 | 107 | 5,000,000 | 4000 | 0.017 | 10710D | — | protostar |
| 6 | 107 | 10,000,000 | 4500 | 17 |  D | sun | star |
| 7 | 1010 | 15,000,000 | 6000 | 170 | D | sun | star (main sequence) |

Table 1: Stages of stellar formation. For reference D=1.4 106 km, 1 pc \=3.11013 km, and the diameter of the Kuiper belt 100 AU \=1.51010 km. The core density of the sun is core,=160 gcm3 .

## [Interstellar Matter](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Interstellar_medium)

In space we notice the stars, and to a lesser extent the planets, but there is much more material there that we don’t see. We call this *interstellar matter* or ISM. In fact, we do “see” ISM when we know how to look. ISM is roughly divided into three categories:

* atomic (size \~1 Å=10-10 m=0.1 nm)   
* molecular (size \~10 Å=10-9 m=1 nm)  
* dust (size \~1000 Å=10-7 m=0.1 m)

The dust does not emit light, but it scatters light making for dark spots in the sky where otherwise there would be light. The diminution of light by dust is called [**extinction**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Extinction_\(astronomy\)) and **reddening**. In the first effect, light is re-reflected away from the line of sight and lost into space. 

1. [Rayleigh scattering](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rayleigh_scattering) is the absorption and re-reflection of light by particles with size dsmaller than the wavelength of the light . The details are complicated but the formula for the intensity of the scattered light is 

	I \= c I0 1+2  d6r214                (d)	(1)

Here c is some constant, I0 is the intensity of the light before it is scattered and r and  give the distance and direction in which the light is scattered. Since it’s light it’s scattered in all directions but not in equal amounts; this formula says how much goes in each direction. 

1. Explain why the radial dependence for the intensity falls off like 1r2. (Hint: this is the fall-off of intensity with distance we’ve discussed before.)  
2. Plot the 1+2  factor in Desmos to see what the radiation field looks like around the scattering particle.   
3. Note the strong dependence on the wavelength and use it to explain why the sun is white/yellow, the sky is blue, and sunsets are red.  
4. For visible light, to what type of interstellar matter does the Rayleigh solution apply? 

Along these lines, shorter-wavelength light is scattered more and longer wavelength light is scattered less. Thus, the light that has passed through an interstellar cloud has had more blue light removed (reradiated in all directions) and the remainder is reddish. 

2. Meet [Barnard 68](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Barnard_68). It is a cloud of dust and molecules 125 pcs away in the constellation [Ophiuchus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ophiuchus). Explain why there are no stars in this hole and why those around the edges of the hole are red.

As we discussed in class, there are three main types of interstellar cloud depending on what the hydrogen is doing. Hydrogen comes in three forms:

* H I: Neutral hydrogen atom consisting of a proton nucleus and an electron bound to it in one of infinitely many orbitals indicated by the “principal quantum number” n=1, 2, 3, ... These orbitals have definite energy given by the formula 

			En= \-13.6 eV 1n2            n=1,2,3, ...	(2)

The \- sign indicates that the electron is bound to the proton. If the energy of an electron is positive, it is unbound and can escape the proton. We see that as we increase n  , the electron is getting closer and closer to freedom as En0. Thus, there are infinitely many bound orbitals but any energy in excess of 13.6 eV is enough to kick an electron in any orbital out of the atom. When that happens, we get 

* H II: Ionized hydrogen. This is a hydrogen ion that is missing its electron (i.e. a prosaic term for the word “proton”). 

Finally, hydrogen can also be in molecular form:

* H2 : Molecular hydrogen. This is two hydrogen atoms bound together covalently by the valence electrons of each H I. The covalent binding energy is about 4.5 eV.

An aside on notation: Spectroscopists refer to various states of ionization of an element, let’s call it “Em” with a roman numeral: Em I is the neutral version of the element Em, Em II is the singly-ionized one (so it has charge \+1), Em III is doubly-ionized, and so on. These ionization states can be identified by the changes in their spectral lines. 

3. Fe IX and Fe X are ions present in the sun’s atmosphere. What are the charges of these ions?   
4. What’s wrong with the ions H III and He IV?

   
The major discoveries of the Quantum Mechanics revolution included the realization that particles and waves are two sides of the same coin: Yes an electron is a particle, but it also has wave-like properties like ([de Broglie](https://en.wikiversity.org/wiki/De_Broglie_wavelength)) wavelength. Yes, light is a wave, but it comes in discrete packets called “photons”, so it is also a particle with a definite energy given by the [Einstein-Planck relation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Planck_relation) 

	E=hf     with     h=6.6  10−34 J⋅s	(3)

A particle of light has a very specific speed c=3.0 108 m/s when it travels in vacuum. This gives a relation for the wavelength in terms of the frequency 

	\=cf	(4)

5. Use these relations to calculate the wavelength of light  
   1. needed to dissociate the hydrogen molecule into two hydrogen atoms  
   2. needed to ionize a hydrogen atom  
   3. least energetic photon that results from a transition to the ground state n=1   
   4. the H line. This is the first Balmer spectral line, which means that is the least energetic transition to the first excited state n=2.  
   5. Identify which part of the [electromagnetic spectrum](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Electromagnetic_spectrum) these photons correspond to (*i.e.* visible, UV, IR, *etc.*)

Note that this calculation implies that it doesn’t take much to break up molecules. Also note that we discussed the Balmer lines before when we talked about the number of atoms in the first excited state in the atmospheres of stars (the [Saha equation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Saha_ionization_equation)). 

* [**Dark nebulae** or **absorption nebulae**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dark_nebula) are dust clouds that may contain atoms and molecules. They often look like holes in the sky because they scatter all light in the visible range away from our line of sight. Infrared and radio wave light may still pass through.   
* [**Emission nebulae**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Emission_nebula) are clouds of ionized gas that are radiating the light of stars in the nebula. These are generally   
  * **Stellar nurseries**: H II regions that are ionized from the UV radiation of new stars  
  * [**Planetary nebulae**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Planetary_nebula): Ionized gas remnants of exploded stars.[^1]  
* [**Reflection nebulae**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reflection_nebula): Clouds of ISM that reflect light from nearby stars. Since short wavelength light is scattered more than long wavelength light, these nebulae tend to be bluish in color.   
* [**Atomic/molecular clouds**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Molecular_cloud): Absorption nebulae that have molecules in them (as opposed to ionized gas). Because long wavelengths are not easily scattered, these nebulae tend to be reddish in color. 

	The atomic clouds do actually emit light. If this is surprising, it’s because the energy at which they do is so low, that we never think about it as a source of light. However, atomic clouds typically can have temperatures \~ 10 K whereas the ambient space has a temperature of \~ 2.7 K. In this sense, clouds are “warm” and radiate according to the Planck distribution.[^2]   
Besides thermal radiation, there is another important radiative hallmark of atomic clouds, as we investigate next.

6. A hydrogen atom in its ground state consists of a proton in the nucleus and an electron in the lowest orbital. We usually don’t worry about it, but there are actually two states with closely-related energies in this configuration: The spin of the electron and proton could be aligned or anti-aligned with a difference of energy of E=5.87 eV. (Recall that one [electronvolt](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Electronvolt) is 1.610-19 J.) Use the [Planck relation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Planck_relation) E=hf and the relation \=c/f between frequency and wavelength to calculate the wavelength of the photon emitted in this transition. What part of the [electromagnetic spectrum](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Electromagnetic_spectrum) is it in? (See chapter3 and in particular figure 3.8 for more about light and its spectrum. See chapter 4.2 for the Planck relation.)

This is called the [**21-cm line**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hydrogen_line) or H I line. It is part of the so-called hyperfine structure of the hydrogen atom: The exceedingly closely-spaced energy levels between states in the hydrogen spectrum. The energy difference is so small that the spins can stay aligned for millions of years. This is an incredibly long time especially when you consider that particles in gasses typically collide billions of times every second. These conditions disrupt the excited state, implying that we do not see certain transitions in laboratory experiments. In typically dramatic fashion, we call these processes “[**forbidden**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Forbidden_mechanism#In_astrophysics_and_atomic_physics)”. In the exceedingly rarified gasses encountered in space, the collision time is measured in *years*, not nanoseconds. Statistically, then, if we have enough particles some of them will have time to decay, thereby emitting a photon with a wavelength of 21-cm. 

7. Using table 1, estimate the order of magnitude of the number of particles in an interstellar cloud. 

	  
A statistical calculation is necessary to find the rate of emission of 21-cm radiation from an interstellar cloud, but this number of particles is so large that we can expect a measurable rate.  The 21-cm line was predicted to be measurable in 1944, and was detected in 1951\. It is the hallmark of ISM, and was used in 1952 to map out the distribution of matter in the galaxy. Not only can the presence of H I be detected, but the Doppler shift can be used to find radial velocity. Even the interstellar magnetic fields can be determined, because magnetic fields change the energy levels of the hydrogen atom, and therefore further shift the emission spectrum ([Zeeman effect](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zeeman_effect)).

These figures show the [Pioneer plaque](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pioneer_plaque) and [Voyager Golden Record](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Voyager_Golden_Record). The diagrams at the top left and bottom right respectively are supposed to represent the hyperfine transition of hydrogen graphically. These objects were attached to the probes in case those probes were ever intercepted by an extraterrestrial intelligence. 

In stage 4, the protostar is \~100 times the size of the main sequence star it will finally settle down to. It enters the HR diagram far above the main sequence line and then descends vertically toward it. This is the [**Kelvin-Helmholtz contraction phase**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kelvin–Helmholtz_mechanism) in which the luminosity of the protostar is due to gravitational contraction: The internal pressure is not yet enough to balance the gravitational attraction. 

8. Let’s estimate the time this phase takes. To simplify, we will assume the luminosity L stays roughly constant. Since luminosity is the rate of change of energy, we need the amount of energy available. By definition, in the Kelvin-Helmholtz phase, this energy is coming from gravitational attraction, so we will estimate it from the gravitational potential energy.   
   1. Use dimensional analysis to show that the gravitational potential energy of a star  of radius R and mass M that formed from particles that were initially very widely separated should be of order   
      	Ug GM2R  	(5)

The intuition behind this is that all the particles that make up this star were separated by parsec distances, so the gravitational energy between them was very small. As they come in to a distance of radius R to make up a star, we get a lot of energy out. This energy is what heats up the star. If we do this calculation carefully, we will need calculus, but the only thing that changes is the numerical coefficient in the relation you derived from dimensional analysis. (The numerical coefficient is 35.) 

2. Calculate the gravitational potential energy for a solar mass star from your estimate.  
   3. The luminosity of the sun L3.81026 W. Since this is a rate of energy consumption (*i.e.* power), we can estimate the time it takes to consume any amount of energy: time \~ energy/power. Use this to estimate the order of magnitude of the amount of time a solar mass protostar will be in the Kelvin-Helmholtz contraction phase. (Compare this to table 1.) 

At the end of stage 4 we start down the [**Hayashi track**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hayashi_track) along which the surface temperature stays roughly constant as the protostar contracts further.  Thick convection zones transport energy to the surface which often results in violent eruptions as the star enters the [**T Tauri phase**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/T_Tauri_star). During this phase, the protostar gives rise to the strong protostellar winds responsible for clearing the protostellar system of interplanetary gas. Early in this phase, the winds are collimated into [**jets**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Astrophysical_jet) shooting out from the poles and perpendicular to the protoplanetary disk. This phase continues until stage 6 when the core temperature finally reaches the 10,000,000 K temperature needed to initiate thermonuclear fusion of protons into helium nuclei. Although the protostar has become a star, the internal pressure is still not balancing the gravitational attraction, and contraction continues until stage 7, where the star finally reaches [**hydrostatic equilibrium**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hydrostatic_equilibrium)**.**

9. Derive the formula for the mass density  (Greek letter rho) of a spherical object of mass M and radius R. Show that the mean solar density 1.4 gcm3 and compare that with the density of water. Express your formula in solar units to get that

	\=MR3       (in solar units)	(6)

Note: “in solar units” means that we are writing the mass and radius in multiples of those of the values of the mass and radius of the Sun. For example if the mass of the star is triple that of the Sun and the radius is double, then the mass is 3M and the radius is 2R. In the notation above, this is M=3 and R=2 so the density is \=38 that of the Sun. 

10. Compare your densities with the density of iron Fe7.9 gcm3. What is the density of gold? What’s the densest element under [standard pressure and temperature](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Standard_temperature_and_pressure) and how dense is it? (You should look up these numbers.) Compare all these numbers with the core stellar density reported in the table below. 

|  | water | iron | gold |  | sun (ave) | sun (core) |
| :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: |
|  gcm3 |  | 7.9 |  | 23 |  | 160 |

Here is a link to a [recent simulation](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8nCW7419FyU&t=63s) by [Starforge](https://starforge.space/index.html) demonstrating star formation from an interstellar cloud. (See also [this](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PUyE3j0aoMw).) In the simulation we see many instances of mass outflows of the T Tauri stars. The ones with [**bipolar outflow**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bipolar_outflow) are called [**Herbig-Haro objects**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Herbig–Haro_object). 

[T Tauri](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/T_Tauri) is the star all the   
others like it are named after  
The Herbig-Haro   
object HH30  
What defines a star on the main sequence is that 

* it “burns” hydrogen specifically (*i.e.* fuses it into helium), and   
* it is in hydrostatic equilibrium. 

Eventually all such stars must burn through their hydrogen. The rate at which they do so is proportional to their luminosity (see problem 8). 

11. Estimate the time a solar-mass star with spectral type G will remain on the main sequence. To do this, remember that the solar luminosity L=41026 W is the amount of energy (in Joules) that the sun puts out every second. The fusion of energy in the sun generates Epp=110-12 J per proton.   
    1. Calculate the number of protons in the sun by assuming it has mass M=21030 kg and is made of protons with mp=1.710-27 kg.   
    2. Assume 20% of this is available for fusion at a rate sustaining the solar luminosity quoted above, and use this to estimate the time this star will remain on the main sequence branch.

Actually, the luminosity of a star is (roughly) proportional to the fourth power of the mass of the star 

	L\*  M\*4	(7)

This is called the **mass-luminosity relation**. We might return to it later when we talk about stellar structure in more detail. Since the luminosity represents the amount of energy emitted per unit time (the rate of burning), the lifetime t\* of a star is inversely proportional to the luminosity t\*1L\*. Since there is more fuel to burn when there is more mass, it is also proportional to the mass t\*M\*. Taken together with the mass-luminosity relation (7), we get that the lifetime of a star is inversely proportional to the cube of the mass of the star:

                t\*  1M\*3	(8)

This means that the more massive the star, the shorter it stays on the main sequence branch. 

12. An oft-cited estimate for the total lifetime of the sun is t=1 1010 yr. Use this to estimate the lifetime of a 15-solar-mass main sequence star. 

13. Go back to table 1 and add up all the time it takes to form a star, that is the time from the beginning of stage 1 until the end of stage 6\. Compare this to the time the star stays on the main sequence. What percentage of the latter time is the former? 

[^1]:  The term “planetary nebula” is a misnomer that stuck. Don’t be confused by the name; it has nothing to do with a planet *per se*.

[^2]:  Hold on a sec… Doesn’t that mean space radiates light too[??](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cosmic_microwave_background) 